config/README.md, before:

# Project Configuration Files

This directory contains configuration files for several aspects of this project.

```sh
.
├── .pylintrc             # Configurations for pylint
├── environment.yml       # Conda environment description
├── models_info.tsv       # Model training parameters
├── query.txt             # EuropePMC query string
├── README.md
├── train_predict.yml     # Configs for reproducing results
└── update_inventory.yml  # Configs for updating inventory
```

# File Descriptions

## `.pylintrc`

Since the test suite includes linting of all Python files with pylint, this configuration file informs pylint about what rules to follow during linting. This helps ensure a consistent testing environment across machines.

## `environment.yml`

This YAML file can be used to directly create a conda environment with all of the dependencies of this project.

## `models_info.tsv`

This tab-separated file contains the configurations used during model training. The columns of this file are as follows:

| model | hf_name | batch_size | learning_rate | weight_decay | scheduler
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
unique, shortened model name used for convenience | pretrained model name as it appears in HuggingFace Hub | number of training examples used by one processor in one training step | step size at each iteration while moving toward a minimum of a loss function | weight decay (L2 penalty) | optional learning rate scheduler flag ( `-lr` or empty)

New rows can be added to this file, and the training pipeline re-run to evaluate the new models against the others. Multiple rows for a given file can also be added to compare performance of training with certain parameters, but the model column should remain unique.

More information about these parameters can be found on [Hugging Face 🤗](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/optimizer_schedules)

## `query.txt`

This text file contains a single string, which is the search query sent to EuropePMC. The publication date range should contain placeholders `{0}` and `{1}`, for the from- and to-dates respectively. If placeholders are not used, the date arguments of `src/query_epmc.py` are ignored.

## `train_predict.yml`

This YAML file contains the majority of the configurations used in the Snakemake pipelines, such as directories and model training configurations. These are the configurations used for reproducing the original results

## `update_inventory.yml`

This YAML file contains the configurations used when updating the inventory. It is mostly just directory specifications.

Commit message:

add info about data analysis files

config/README.md, after:

# Project Configuration Files

This directory contains configuration files for several aspects of this project.

```sh
.
├── .pylintrc             # Configurations for pylint
├── environment.yml       # Conda environment description
├── models_info.tsv       # Model training parameters
├── query.txt             # EuropePMC query string
├── README.md
├── train_predict.yml     # Configs for reproducing results
└── update_inventory.yml  # Configs for updating inventory
```

# File Descriptions

## `.pylintrc`

Since the test suite includes linting of all Python files with pylint, this configuration file informs pylint about what rules to follow during linting. This helps ensure a consistent testing environment across machines.

## `environment.yml`

This YAML file can be used to directly create a conda environment with all of the dependencies of this project.

## `models_info.tsv`

This tab-separated file contains the configurations used during model training. The columns of this file are as follows:

| model | hf_name | batch_size | learning_rate | weight_decay | scheduler
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
unique, shortened model name used for convenience | pretrained model name as it appears in HuggingFace Hub | number of training examples used by one processor in one training step | step size at each iteration while moving toward a minimum of a loss function | weight decay (L2 penalty) | optional learning rate scheduler flag ( `-lr` or empty)

New rows can be added to this file, and the training pipeline re-run to evaluate the new models against the others. Multiple rows for a given file can also be added to compare performance of training with certain parameters, but the model column should remain unique.

More information about these parameters can be found on [Hugging Face 🤗](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/optimizer_schedules)

## `query.txt`

This text file contains a single string, which is the search query sent to EuropePMC. The publication date range should contain placeholders `{0}` and `{1}`, for the from- and to-dates respectively. If placeholders are not used, the date arguments of `src/query_epmc.py` are ignored.

## `train_predict.yml`

This YAML file contains the majority of the configurations used in the Snakemake pipelines, such as directories and model training configurations. These are the configurations used for reproducing the original results.

Toward the end of this file, you can chose which output files are used for data analysis. Currently it is set to use the newly generaly output files. However, you can uncomment the file names that are stored in the repository to reproduce the figures/analyses exactly in case something changes over time, sucha s the metadata retrieved from EuropePMC.

## `update_inventory.yml`

This YAML file contains the configurations used when updating the inventory. It is mostly just directory specifications.
